Hello, good afternoon everyone.
Please have a seat.
Welcome to session 514,
OpenGL Performance Optimization.
This is the last dedicated OpenGL session
at the conference and a must attend
for all of those coding for OpenGL.
We're going to show you a specially
designed tool for profiling and
optimizing OpenGL coding and
That tool is really cool.
OpenGL profiler is going to ease your way
and the performance of your application.
But most importantly,
you're going to hear the do's
and the don'ts of OpenGL coding
from the man responsible for
Apple's OpenGL implementation.
And I'm happy to introduce
you to the stage,
Apple OpenGL manager, John Stauffer.
Thanks Sergio.
Okay, today we're going to talk about
how to optimize OpenGL and
let's jump right into it.
So that's me.
I manage the OpenGL engineering
group at Apple.
We have a great team of people
who work really hard to bring you
a quality OpenGL implementation.
And what I want to talk about today,
briefly, is more of a summary of what
we see developers coming
to us with over the year.
So we want to give you some basic
suggestions about how to use OpenGL,
what will work well for you,
what to avoid,
try to direct you down the right paths.
And also to point out some of
the recent additions to OpenGL,
both in optimizations and in extensions.
So we've been working hard to
optimize current paths that
you may already be using.
So you may get some benefit from
OpenGL just by installing Jaguar.
And then the extension side,
there's some really advanced
optimization extensions that
you'll want to try to use.
And then we want to show you
how to use them if you can.
It'll get you a lot of performance
if you can utilize these extensions,
as I'll show in the demos.
Using Threads The use of threads can
bring you a unique set of performance
optimizations depending on what
type of rendering you're doing.
We'll go through a couple possible
uses for threads and how you can try
to leverage that in your application.
Tools As Sergio mentioned,
we're going to be shipping a new tool
in Jaguar called the OpenGL Profiler.
It is targeted towards helping you
understand what your application
performance issues are and helps
you try to identify where time is
being spent in the OpenGL pipeline.
So you'll see that it's a powerful
tool once we go through it and
hopefully it'll give you some
benefit when you start using it.
Sampler I briefly mentioned Sampler here.
I'm not really going to
go into Sampler much.
But it is a tool that you should use
in conjunction with our Profiler.
It's a very powerful system level tool.
That will give you a more broader view
of your application performance issues.
We won't be focusing on that,
but it is a tool that you
ought to be familiar with.
And then lastly we'll go into a
little bit of where to look for help.
App Services
So, every now and then I'm going to
pull up a slide and it's going
to be titled Basic Optimizations.
So, what these slides are is
just the do's and don'ts.
So,
The first thing that I want to talk
about on basic optimization is the thing
that people need to try to identify
in their application is what are their
bottlenecks and what kind of data are
they primarily passing around the system.
So what we usually find in applications
is they're either passing lots of pixels,
so they're moving lots of pixels around,
or they're passing lots of geometry.
Rarely actually are people passing both,
believe it or not.
So I tried to point out that you
should look at your application and
try to identify what is your data type
that you're trying to pass around.
And we'll talk about specifically
optimizations that you can apply to
those particular types of data sets.
So once you've identified
what you're passing around,
you'll also want to look at other
things your application's doing,
like what's dynamic.
Are some of those data sets static,
or are they dynamic?
The different optimizations you'll
apply to that will depend on whether
they are dynamic data or static data.
And also, how complex is your data?
There is different techniques you'll
want to apply for depending on how
complex the data you're passing around,
or complex I mean by size.
So if it's very large data,
maybe it's something that you'll
have to treat in a unique way,
or if it's smaller,
you can probably just pass it
down through some of the more
standard techniques and let
OpenGL deal with it and not have
to get a little more complicated.
So another last thing that
I'd like to have you look at
your application and ask is,
are you spooling data
from disk in real time?
There's some techniques to use to
getting data spooled on and off the disk,
and we'll go a little bit into that.
So firstly,
just putting the OpenGL pipeline,
a real basic drawing of the
OpenGL pipeline up here so we
can get an idea of the different
groups of different areas of the
pipeline that we want to just think
about as we're talking about this.
So the first one is vertices.
Vertices are the geometric data,
obviously, that go through the system.
And that is primarily what
people think of when they think
of passing data to OpenGL.
But also there's a category
that's equally as important,
and that's the state data.
State is really anything
that OpenGL retains.
It's a current state of the pipeline.
So state is the configuration of the
card or anything that OpenGL is going to
not just simply pass through but retain.
And a lot of that state can
actually be retrieved by you
back out through the API.
And as you'll see in
some of the discussion,
there is an interesting issue
with when we start talking about
caching data in the system.
There's an interesting performance issues
with that related to the that we have
to do bookkeeping in OpenGL to keep it.
We have to make maybe a
copy of it and keep it.
So those are the two categories.
Textures fall under the state category
in this diagram that I have here.
So you're passing,
when you're passing a texture,
really a texture is a piece of
state that you can retrieve back.
It can be bound.
It can be deleted.
It can be replaced and such.
So, so the first thing,
my first suggestion is, um,
I highlight it in red because I want
to make sure that everyone understands.
Uh, we ask people to almost
never call geo flush.
And you'll see at the bottom,
to never call geo finish.
And the reason I say almost on the
top one is that the only reason you
ever want to call Geo flush is if
you're a single buffered application.
And we don't even like
applications to be single buffered.
We'd rather you be double buffered.
So we really ask that people
try to stay away from these.
And I brought this up first because it
is the number one easy performance trick
that you can do to your application.
And if you don't think
you're calling that,
but you're not 100% sure,
search your code, look for Geo flush,
Geo finish, and if you find them,
comment them out.
If you're a double buffered application,
just comment out those lines
because you don't need them.
They can give you potentially up
to about a 20% speed improvement
if you're calling GL finish just by
commenting out that one line because
what GL finish does is it actually is
a synchronous call that will truncate
the command stream and send it to the
graphics card and wait for it to return
after the graphics card is finished.
So what you've in effect done is
you've stalled the CPU waiting
for the graphics card to finish
the processing of the data.
So you're gonna wait for the
graphics card to eat all the data,
return back around and tell
the CPU that it's done.
So the CPU's stuck, it's idle,
it's not doing anything while
that's happening and you're
fundamentally operating in synchronous
behavior to the graphics card.
You're not operating asynchronously
to the graphics processing unit.
So, some other basic suggestions.
And we're going to go over the basics
and then we're going to get into
some more complex things like the
title of the session is advanced.
But we'll cover these basics real quick.
So, avoid using GeoReadPixels.
ReadPixels calls an implicit GeoFinish.
So anytime you retrieve
pixels back out of the system,
we have to flush the entire command
stream because the pixels that
you're reading in the command buffer,
I'm sorry, in the frame buffer,
need to be the pixels that represent
the state of the system at that point.
So we need to guarantee that
we've rendered everything.
So,
ReadPixels calls an implicit GeoFinish.
And it'll have the same performance
impact as if you were to call GeoFinish
and then some because obviously then
you're reading data back across a bus.
So, really the only time that you
want to be calling GeoFinish is if
you're looking to spool data off the
graphics card and save it to disk.
Maybe some type of,
you're using the graphics card
for doing a rendering of a
sequence and you want to save it.
We discourage it from being used for
things that are meant to be interactive,
like you just want to save a copy of
something so you can keep refreshing it.
There's better ways to
save data for refresh,
refreshing dirty areas on the screen.
ReadPixels is usually
a slow way to do it.
So we recommend that you look
into the other techniques first
before you resort to ReadPixels.
So the second item here is
the parallel to read pixels.
It's GL draw pixels.
And we also recommend that you don't
use that function call because it's a
very hard call to optimize in OpenGL.
The reason being is it is a call that
will require us to copy the data.
And as you'll see in some of the
demos that I'm going to give,
there's ways to allow us
to not even copy the data,
but in fact the data to be read directly
from your memory up to the graphics card.
So the driver's not copying the data.
So we're going to advertise to you that
the best thing to do is to use APIs that
allow us to operate asynchronous.
The CPUs are allowed to operate
asynchronous to the graphics card.
Drop pixels really doesn't
do a good job of that.
There's better ways to do it.
So before we jump into
some more complex subjects,
last suggestion here,
minimize state changes.
State changes, again, are textures,
enables, disables.
Anything that you're fiddling
with in the state machine,
you want to minimize.
It has an impact on the system.
Usually the impact is that we
have to synchronize some software.
We have to go notify the graphics card.
It has to change the state
of the graphics card,
maybe do some conversion of
the state into something the
graphics card understands.
So there's processing that
goes on behind the background.
So some state changes,
while they may seem trivial,
sometimes they can add up to be
quite a bit of time being spent.
And it can be a surprising amount
of performance loss if you're
really banging on the state machine.
Okay, so what's new in Jaguar?
So even though I mentioned
previously that we discourage
you from using draw pixels,
read pixels, there they are,
we do understand that people
have applications and they have
code that previously was written.
They don't have an opportunity
to use other techniques or it's
just very inconvenient for them.
So we actually are spending
quite a bit of time to optimize
those paths for those people.
So in Jaguar, you'll see that draw
pixels now actually will,
under the covers,
simulate the technique that
we're trying to advertise to you.
It will copy the data once,
so there'll be a data copy,
but then once we copy the data,
it will give an optimized
upload to the graphics card.
So it won't be as good as
some of the other techniques,
but it gets as close as we possibly can.
So geo-read pixels.
The previous release of OpenGL would
actually use the CPU to read
the pixels back across the bus,
and reading the pixels back across
the bus obviously is a bad idea.
You're consuming CPU time and
you're only nibbling away across
a PCI bus to get the data back.
So now we DMA the data.
We have the graphics card
pushed into a piece of memory
and it's significantly faster.
So the numbers that we're seeing,
we're seeing about an order of
magnitude performance increase.
So we went from about 6 to 9 megabytes
a second to 60 to 90 megabytes a
second of read pixels performance.
We're looking to improve that as well.
We think there's still headroom
to grow and improve that.
But that's something that's new.
So text sub-image.
That is now a VRAM to VRAM copy.
So that will give you a
on-video card copy from one
region of memory to another.
It will never touch the CPU.
And if you read that texture back,
beware we'll have to update the system
copy because we now have stagnated,
or the system copy has gone stale.
We've said this one is not the
master copy anymore because you
have updated it on the video card.
So if you read that texture back,
if you want those bits out of it,
we will have to go through an
operation in the driver to read the
bits back off the graphics card,
put them in the system copy
before we give them to you.
So beware that if you're using that call,
don't ask for the texture
back because it's going to
take a little while to get it.
DisplayList.
So DisplayList now are very optimized.
They use some of the extensions I'll
be talking about internally to OpenGL,
one of them being the
vertex array object.
Vertex array object is built on top
of vertex array range and offers very
good performance for static data.
And it's our intent that we
will continue to optimize this,
improve the algorithms.
Basically, how it works right now is
that we take the data that
you put into a display list,
we will examine it,
post-process it into something
that's more optimal for the hardware,
cache it into that optimal format
so that when you go to draw with it,
we're not reformatting it with a
CPU or copying the data around.
Basically, at that point,
all we do is submit it
to the graphics card.
So drawing a display list now
is fairly low burden on the CPU.
It's just a matter of a submission
call to the graphics card for drawing.
So vertex arrays.
I'm not talking about
vertex array range here.
I'm talking about just standard
vertex arrays without any extensions.
We've optimized that as well.
This is better than it was.
It's still not the best you can do.
We'll see later.
Image processing.
So we've been improving
our image processing code.
There is a number of formats,
pixel formats,
that we have optimized with Altevec,
tried to get the maximum performance
of texture upload and image
conversion through the system.
Okay, so I'm going to jump
into some specifics here.
Let's talk about the texture
pipeline a little bit.
So the diagram we see here shows that the
Basic path that textures take
to get to the graphics card.
So each of these blocks...
Okay, how about now?
Okay, how much did you miss?
It was boring anyways.
Okay, so,
the two boxes that I have up here,
those represent the number of
times a texture may get copied
as it goes through the system.
So, as I talked about before,
textures are state,
and we have to retain that state,
because you may ask for it back.
So, what OpenGL does is it has to make
a retained copy of the texture,
and, in case you ask for it back.
So, what we do is we take a texture,
we copy it into a retained area,
and then when the first
time you go to draw with it,
the graphics card takes that
retained copy and copies it into
a hardware specific format for
uploading to the graphics card.
So, if you're looking at using the
standard OpenGL texturing path for
spooling data up to the system,
up to the graphics card,
you're going to see that
there's two copies of the data.
We're going to undergo two copies.
So, the optimizations that we
want to show today are how to
eliminate both those copies.
So, there's extensions that will offer a
way to eliminate those copies and get
you substantial performance increases.
So, again,
this is a standard OpenGL pipeline.
We'll see how we can improve it.
So, again, some basic texture
optimization suggestions.
So what you want to do is
you want to think about,
again,
how your application is using textures.
You want to think about how much room
you have in the graphics card and scale
your textures to fit on the hardware.
The best thing to do,
and I'm not going to
go into this session,
is to examine the graphics card for
how much video memory is available.
Scale your textures such that
they'll approximately scale
to that piece of hardware.
So the second thing is don't second
guess OpenGL's texture paging.
The texture paging in
OpenGL is very efficient,
in Apple's OpenGL, it's very efficient.
It uses very little CPU time.
Basically we've already pre-compiled
the data into a format that's
ready for the hardware to consume.
So if the texture has to be uploaded
to the graphics card a second time,
it's very simple for us.
It's very similar to what
we do to display lists,
for instance.
We post-process it into a format
that the next time through all we
have to do is submit a token into
the stream and upload that texture.
So if you are thinking you're going to be
running into a texture paging condition,
you might want to not try to second
guess OpenGL's texture paging.
Because what you'll end
up doing is fighting it or
being inefficient with video.
member usage.
So the formats that you want to
use for textures preferably are the
BGRA unsigned short 1555 format and
the BGRA unsigned int 888 format.
And those formats are the,
believe it or not,
the native pixel formats
for the Macintosh.
The naming convention came from the ARM.
They're a little confusing.
The way the naming works is that
BGRA and the reverse on the type
reverses the nomenclature on the BGRA.
So it ends up being ARGB.
And that is the native
pixel type of the Macintosh.
So these are the data types you
want to use for uploading images.
These will be the most direct
path through the system.
Okay, so let's get into optimizing that
diagram that I showed you before and
how to remove some of those copies so
you can get the maximum performance.
So the first one,
the first extension is OpenGL texture
extension is the Apple client storage.
Eliminates the first block,
the first copy that OpenGL makes.
It was the retained copy.
And what it does is this extension
tells OpenGL that I don't
want you to keep a copy of it.
I want you to use the application's copy.
So the caveat to using this
extension is that you have to
keep a copy around for OpenGL.
So you have the texture,
you use this extension and now OpenGL is
just going to simply put a pointer
towards your copy of the texture
such that if we need it again we're
going to come back and ask you for it.
So you can't delete the
texture off from underneath us.
You've got the retained copy, you own it.
We're not going to copy it again for you.
So the benefits of this are obviously
one that we're not going to copy
the pixels that you already have.
So obviously there's
some caveats to that.
You need to use a format that we
can be compatible with and such.
But the other benefit
is it can save memory.
So if you're going to keep your
copy of the texture around anyways,
no use to us keeping a copy as well.
So we can eliminate potentially one
copy of that texture residing in system
memory somewhere and save some memory,
maybe up the performance.
You just have to follow the
rules and keep the texture around
for us if we need it later.
Okay, so the next extension is
the apple texture range.
This extension is very similar to
the vertex array range where what
we do is you are telling OpenGL,
I've got this texture.
Please map that texture into AGP space.
So you've allocated a piece of memory.
You've handed it to us.
We are going to use this extension to
define that piece of memory to OpenGL,
and now we're going to
map that memory into AGP,
and given that you followed
some of the basic rules of what
the format of that texture is,
if you've given the texture
format as the preferred format
that I previously listed,
what will happen is that we
will map that memory into AGP,
and now the graphics card is
talking directly to your memory.
You won't even have to convert
it to a harder specific format.
You've basically already provided that,
and what we're going to do is
we're going to map that into AGP,
and we're going to have the graphics
card DMA it straight from your copy.
So the performance gain and the CPU,
the burden that we lessen by
doing this is quite a bit,
and we'll see in a demonstration
I'll give momentarily how
substantial that impact is.
So one thing that I want to mention is
that there is a synchronization issue.
So if you've got the graphics card coming
around spooling bits out of your memory,
obviously that's an asynchronous process.
We don't know exactly when that graphics
card is going to come around and do this,
so you'll have to take care of
some synchronization issues,
making sure that you are... talking
to the graphics card as to when you're
going to update it and find out yourself
when it's going to be completed.
So the extension we provide to do
this is the GLAppleFence extension,
and that is a synchronization extension
for providing tokens into the stream
where you then can query if a particular
operation's done and find out if
that texture is done being used by
the current commands in the stream.
We'll talk a little bit
more about that later.
I wanted to just mention it
and we'll go into it more.
Okay, so the third extension here,
off the top it doesn't seem
like it has anything to do with
what we were talking about.
But it turns out that it does.
The texture rectangle is the
third missing piece in our full
optimization path through OpenGL.
What texture rectangle does is
it allows non-power 2 textures to
be defined and given to OpenGL.
It is the fastest path through
our system and there are hardware
specific reasons why that is.
It's some of the hardware,
the Power 2 textures are
required to be swizzled.
So, since the non-Power 2 textures
don't have to be swizzled into
a hardware specific format,
it allows us to point the hardware
directly towards your copy,
not forcing us to swizzle it
into another copy that we retain.
So, there are,
it is required to use this extension
if you want to spool data at maximum
performance up to the graphics card.
So, we think that this is an okay thing,
that you want to be,
that we're requiring you to use
this primarily for the reason that
if you're using Power 2 textures,
usually you're looking at having
the graphics card retain those,
use them frame, one frame to another,
and not,
you're not looking to spool data for,
up to the graphics card for blitting,
for instance.
If you're looking to play video,
or if you're looking to, um,
just blit images to the screen for
one shot images and then discard it,
a power, uh,
non-Power 2 is actually okay,
because that's, usually that's very, um,
conducive to the environment that that,
uh, situation arises.
So, there are some restrictions
using this extension.
Uh, the first one is, is that it doesn't
allow mipmap filtering.
So, so mipmap filtering means that
obviously you have one layer.
You have the base layer
and there are no filters.
There are no higher levels of
mipmaps associated with that texture.
It also doesn't allow GL repeat.
So, if you were mapping a
texture to a surface,
it won't allow you to repeat that
continuously across the surface.
So, it's, again, it's,
it's going to be useful for just
blitting an image to the screen,
but it's not going to be real useful for,
uh,
doing generic games or other types of,
uh, interactive, uh, applications.
So, these three extensions that I just
went through are the exact three
extensions that we use to get the Quartz
Extreme to run at optimal performance.
So, these are the extensions and
the techniques that we use.
And you'll see, I don't know how many of
you have seen it already,
but we're able to composite
with deep video compositing
where we have DVD playing.
We've got ten terminals over that
are semi-translucent and able
to maintain decent frame rate.
We're able to do all the
things you see on the desktop
using those three extensions.
So, they're very powerful once
you get those integrated
correctly into your application,
once you are integrated to a point
where you're able to run asynchronous
from the graphics processor.
One last mention about this extension
is the texture coordinates are no
longer normalized texture coordinates,
they are in textual coordinates.
So if you are using this extension
you'll have to adjust your
texture coordinates accordingly.
Okay, so we're going to run a quick demo.
If we can switch to demo machine two.
So, the visual side of this
isn't all that appealing,
but what we want to do is two things.
We want to show the CPU monitor and
the effect that these extensions have
both on performance and CPU usage.
So I have three check boxes here.
Each of these check boxes basically
represents one of the extensions
that I was just talking about.
So I'm going to turn these off,
and I've got two sliders here.
The top one represents how
many images I'm paging between,
so you'll see the number toggling
up there in the middle of the image,
just to prove to you that
these are different images.
And they are being uploaded every frame,
so I'm not caching them
on the graphics card.
I'm uploading them and
deleting them basically.
And I've got a frame rate modifier here,
so I can dictate how fast
I want the frame rate to go.
So let's just crank
everything up to the maximum,
turn all the extensions off.
So what you'll see is that I'm basically
consuming 100% of one of the CPUs.
So that's as fast as I can go.
I'm pretty much CPU limited,
and I'm pegged at 22 frames a second,
a transfer rate of 95 megabytes
So there's two bad things about this.
One is I'm consuming a CPU,
which means that I'm taking
that away from what your
application could be using.
And the second bad thing is that
I'm only getting 22 frames a second.
Obviously if I'm bleeding an image,
I'd like to be a little
bit better than that.
So let's do a couple things.
Let's turn on the client storage,
which was the first
extension I mentioned.
So you'll see that we went
from 22 frames a second,
95 megabytes a second,
up to 152 megabytes a second.
So right there we got about
50% speed improvement.
But we've noticed that
CPU burden is unchanged.
So again,
we're still making a copy of the data.
So as you remember, we have two copies.
That eliminated one of the copies.
We still have one copy we're making,
so we're still CPU limited.
We're using the CPU to make a copy
and that's the limiting factor here.
So let's turn on some more
extensions and see what happens here.
So now if we turn on texture rectangle,
we go to 210 megabytes a second.
So there we got about another
30% speed improvement.
And that was simply from
the fact that this is a more
optimal path through the driver.
So now the last thing we're
going to do is we're going to
turn on the third extension.
And once we turn them all on,
good things happen.
So you'll see that immediately
the CPU burden went down.
And the frame rate went up and now
we're pushing 350 megabytes a second.
So we're using hardly any CPU usage and
now we're pushing 350 megabytes a second.
And the reason is,
is that we're not making
any copies with the CPU,
we're running asynchronous
to the graphics card,
we're only synchronizing when we have to.
So there's a couple things about this.
One is that I'm overdriving the system.
I'm telling it I want 150 frames
a second here on my slider.
That's not very reasonable.
If we dial it down to something that
would probably be more realistic.
Let's say I want to push almost
the refresh rate of the monitor,
let's say about 50 frames a second.
So you'll see the CPU usage,
the little we were using,
dropped even further.
Once we stopped overdriving it
and forcing the CPU to block
against the graphics card.
And the last thing I want to mention
about this is the reason I have the
number of buffers I have up here.
I have five.
So five isn't all that interesting,
it turns out.
But at least having two is.
So now I'm toggling between
texture zero and one.
And you'll see that the,
if I pump it back up
to overdriving again,
the performance didn't change.
So I could go from here, which is 355,
up to here.
It's unchanged.
The interesting thing about
this is if I go down to,
uh... a single buffer
now driving the system
Then I drop down to 250 megabytes
a second instead of 350.
The reason is, is that,
The double buffering allows me to operate
more asynchronous to the graphics card.
So as the graphics card
is reading one buffer,
I'm updating the other, right?
So I'm ping-ponging back and forth,
giving the graphics card time
to read the data while I'm
working on the other data set.
So you can get some benefit
by double buffering.
You don't necessarily have to.
There's still a benefit,
a very large benefit to
going with a single buffer.
And again, once I dial it down and not,
don't overdrive it.
You can still see I'm
not using CPU very much.
I'm getting good transfer rate.
And in fact, the lower you dial it down,
that also gives it time for the
graphics card time to upload the data.
So I'm not hitting up against the
graphics card and stalling against it.
So this demo kind of shows the
benefit that the combination
of those three extensions has.
And how,
basically how big of a performance
gain you can get by using at
least some combination of these.
You don't have to
necessarily use all three.
Each one has its own benefit.
But the combination of three together
gives you the maximum benefit.
Okay, can you switch back slides?
We're going to jump off that
topic and we're going to get into
Vertex pipeline a little bit.
So the Vertex pipeline,
I like to think of it as
having two distinct paths that
can go through the system.
We have the medium of path,
which is the top flow chart there,
and we have the Vertex array path,
which is the bottom chart.
The immediate mode path
has an immediate penalty,
basically,
built into it where any data you pass in,
fundamentally, we're going to have to
retain a copy of it.
So, you'll notice in the OpenGL API,
I'm not sure how
familiar you are with it,
but you can retrieve the current color,
current texture coordinate,
current normals.
You can retrieve that
data back out of the API.
So, that means we have to have it
somewhere where you can get to it.
So, the first thing we have to do
when you pass in our normal
color or texture coordinate,
we have to save it.
We have to keep it there because we're
not sure in the medium mode path,
we're not sure what the
next call is in the stream.
You may be done there and the next thing
you may do is you may ask for it back.
So, we have to have it somewhere where we
can retrieve it and give it back to you.
So,
that's a penalty of the immediate mode.
Then, we have to take that copy and
we push it on the command stream
for the graphics card to consume.
So, right there's two copies
just like textures.
We have to save it in the current
state and have it in a location
where we can retrieve it as
well as copy it into a command,
into a hardware specific format.
Whereas vertex arrays give you the
immediate benefit where you're giving us
an entire stream of the data and in fact,
the definition of vertex arrays
in OpenGL is that the current
state of the normal color and
texture coordinates are undefined
after the operation is completed.
So, if you pass us a vertex
array for drawing,
the definition is that it is
undefined after that's completed.
So, we don't make a copy of it at all.
So, we never retain it.
If you ask for it back,
it'll be undefined what you get.
Okay,
so let's go over some basics of how we
would go about optimizing this path.
The first thing we would do
is we would try to avoid the
medium of path altogether.
That's a path that is just not optimal.
It never will be as
optimal as it could be.
Maximize the,
so if you're stuck on that path,
let's just talk about that.
Maximize the number of
vertices per begin in.
So what you want to do is you
want to pack as many vertices
between begin in as possible.
And we'll go over a code example
of that in just a second.
Use efficient primitive types.
So use efficient primitive types.
Use triangle strips, quad strips.
That reduces the number
of vertices per primitive,
giving you more efficiency.
And use AGL macros and CGL macros dot H.
I'm not going to talk about those much,
but what those do is those allow you to
drill down into the OpenGL API slightly,
down a layer underneath
our top level framework,
and it reduces the
function call overhead.
It also removes some of the
lookups of the current context.
So if you're interested,
write those down.
If you're using the medium of path,
look at those.
Those macros, those files,
if you utilize those,
those can give you about
a 20% speed improvement.
So you're spending a lot of
time in function calls when
you're in the medium of path,
and those will show you how much.
Okay, so some extensions of how
we optimize this path.
So you'll see there's a little
new jelly button up there.
GL apple vertex array range,
we've talked about a little bit already.
It's similar to the texture array range,
texture range extension,
where you are basically
giving us a pointer to memory.
We are taking that pointer
of a specified format,
we're mapping it in AGP,
and then we're allowing
you to dump data into that,
and we're going to tell the graphics
card to spool it directly using a
DMA engine up to the graphics card.
CP will not make a copy of that.
So there are some restrictions.
You want to use it if available,
but the restrictions are that it requires
the graphics card to do transform
clipping and lighting and hardware.
So if the graphics card
doesn't have that capability,
we can't give you this extension.
Because obviously if you're
using a graphics card,
if the idea is to not have
the CPU touch the data,
the graphics card better be
able to do all the operations
required for that data set.
So briefly, again,
what it does is that this is a
process of you handing us memory,
just like in textures,
we dynamically map that
memory into AGP space.
It's, it's, in OS X, we have a built-in
technology such that you can,
that we can map dispersed areas of
memory into AGP and maintain those,
and these, these memory regions can
reside in the client's memory,
they can reside in the driver, reside in,
just about anywhere, and we manage those,
mapping them, unmapping them.
So again,
just like in the texture range extension,
we have to provide a synchronization
mechanism to applications such that
if you are writing on the data,
you can have a mechanism for determining
if the graphics card is completed reading
the data before you touch it again.
So another extension is
the vertex array object.
This is fairly simple.
It gives you the same level
of functionality as texture
objects provide for textures.
So it's a parallel of that analogy
such that you can have multiple texture
arranged objects and each object
can have its own AGP mapping region.
So it allows you to give a parallel
paradigm to texture objects.
Okay, so compile vertex array.
This was last year's
winner for performance.
And now we're demoting it to number two.
So you only want to use
this path if the range,
array range extension is not offered.
So this one is still going to be
the fastest path for non-TCL cards.
and you'll want to use the array
range extension if it's available.
So let's go through a quick code example.
So this code example just
starts off with a piece of code,
um,
and what we're going to do is we're going
to walk through trying to optimize it and
see what kind of steps people should take
when they look at optimizing their code.
So here it looks, average piece of code.
What we're going to do is,
the first thing we
notice is that the state,
uh, is static.
It doesn't change, uh,
every time through the loop.
It's static.
So let's remove the state
change out of the loop,
and, uh, save the graphics pipeline from
having to thrash the state.
Because what we don't do
in the graphics car- uh,
driver is we don't examine
whether the state really changed.
We assume that you're doing your
job of only sending us state
changes when they've changed.
So we make the assumption that
if you change a piece of state,
that's different than the last time.
We don't check.
So let's move it out of there,
let's do our job on the application
side and get that state changed,
uh, to an appropriate level
in the-in the for loop.
So the next thing that we do is we
notice that we're passing triangles,
but we're only passing one
triangle per loop through the,
uh, through the for loop.
So what we want to do is we
want to move that begin end pair
outside the for loop and get,
uh, as many vertices per
begin end pair as we can.
Next thing we want to do is we
want to simplify the data types.
So we were passing through
a double form of the color.
Um, OpenGL is not going to want doubles.
It's going to want floats.
So, uh, let's just pass natively floats
through the system and not cause us
to do double the float conversion.
Uh, the second thing we did here is we
passed through a vector form of the
vertex instead of individual conversion.
of individual components.
Slightly more optimal.
So the next thing we do,
like I said in my slides,
we want to use optimal primitive types.
So we change from a triangle,
individual triangles to a triangle strip.
So now you'll see that we've
basically eliminated the number
of vertex calls by factor three.
So we're going to get significantly
better bandwidth doing that.
Now, what we would like to be able to
do is be able to use vertex arrays.
So, I've looked in my code and I said,
well, you know what,
this is just an array of data.
I can pass it through a vertex array.
I can eliminate the for loop altogether.
Basically, what this does is it moves
the for loop into OpenGL.
It allows us to optimize
around the for loop inside,
internal to OpenGL.
And the last thing I do is
I use vertex array range to,
to get the maximum bandwidth
through the system.
So, the previous slide showed
using vertex arrays.
Now, I add in the three calls to enable
and define the pointer to OpenGL,
setting up the vertex array range.
Now, the one thing I don't show in this
slide is the fact that you don't want
to be doing all these calls every time.
Like, for instance,
I'm doing a vertex pointer and
enabling some state and setting
up the vertex array range.
Ideally, you want to do this
as little as possible,
just like,
like the other examples of moving
things out of the for loops.
So, what you would like to do is
set this up potentially once
somewhere in your application and
then draw from it multiple times.
Use draw elements multiple times,
or draw arrays multiple times
to get the drawing command.
Okay, so let's show a quick demo of that.
So we can go to demo machine two.
And we're
Okay, so again we have a,
this is a demo that I used last year,
so if anyone was here,
we're going to show this.
So,
What I've got is I've got a slider
that goes up the different levels
of optimization that I just showed.
So the bottom one is doing the
individual triangles very slow.
You can see we're only getting
about 690,000 triangles a second.
This next notch up shows moving the
begin and pair outside of the for loop
using a more optimized primitive type.
So you can see that we almost doubled,
about doubled in performance
just by doing that.
So that was a significant
benefit to OpenGL.
This notch here, and each time,
by the way, you can see the color coding
of where time's being spent.
I guess I should have
mentioned that before.
The red is where time's being spent
elsewhere outside the application.
The green is time being spent
calculating the wave and blue
is the time spent in OpenGL.
So it's our job as the
OpenGL team to minimize the blue.
So we're giving you techniques
to minimize the blue.
It's your job to minimize
the red and the green.
So we've gone to draw arrays.
We've gotten a little
bit better performance.
We went from 1.4 million triangles
a second to about 1.5 million.
This top notch is vertex array range.
So now using vertex array range,
you can see the time spent in
OpenGL has gone down substantially.
And we've gone from basically 1.7 million
triangles a second to almost 5 million.
So, the next thing obviously to do
is to utilize the fact that we
have multiple CPUs on this system.
So now we're pushing about 10
million triangles a second.
Um, and we, remember we started off
at about a half a million.
So, that's about, um,
You know,
that's 20 times the speed improvement
just by using these extensions.
There's no change in the
algorithms elsewhere,
just in how it's driving OpenGL.
So let's switch back slides.
Okay, Apple Fence.
So I've been mentioning
that here and there.
We'll just briefly talk about it.
I'm not going to go into
all the details of using it.
We've got some other things we want to
show and we want to have time to do that.
So Apple Fence provides
synchronization tokens for putting
into the OpenGL command stream to
allow you to synchronize with these
different extensions that will
require you to talk to the graphics
card and determine when it's done.
So there's two ways to do it.
You can do it synchronously
or asynchronously.
There's a call that you can call and say,
I'm waiting for this token.
Please don't return until
you have completed that.
Or you can do it asynchronously
where you can query and say,
are you done?
And if it says no, maybe you can go off
and do some other work.
So if there's a possibility
you have something better
to be doing with your time,
you can go do that with the CPU.
So, the other uses for this is there,
it does provide a mechanism for
synchronizing between threads.
So it is a general
synchronization mechanism.
So if you have multiple threads that
are looking to perform an operation,
you can start looking at,
at this extension as a way to talk
between threads for synchronizing,
um, operations between threads.
And again,
you'll want to use this for synchronizing
vertex and texture range operations.
So using threads.
Loading textures in a second thread is
one possible use of threads in OpenGL.
In a second,
I'll show a brief example of that.
But one benefit of that is you can have
two shared contexts talking to a single
pipeline through the OpenGL stream.
And you can use one thread, for instance,
for loading those textures,
and another thread for drawing.
And then start utilizing the preemptive
nature of our operating system to flatten
out the time spent in a given operation.
So the--
So what you don't want to do,
the danger of using threads is that
people immediately want to start calling
a single context from multiple threads.
While we do allow that,
there's a danger with that and that is
if you have two threads without careful
synchronization between those threads
talking to a single OpenGL context,
you'll crash your application because
what happens is you'll be poking data
into the OpenGL stream and confusing
the OpenGL engine from multiple threads,
contaminating the command stream
and bringing the system down.
So just a note about threads, that's not,
if you do want to drive multiple threads,
be very cautious how you do it.
You can get yourself in trouble.
Okay, so a brief diagram here.
So what I was talking about
before was using two contexts,
two threads.
These contexts in this diagram
are set up to share textures so
that one context can be loading
textures while the other is drawing.
And it looks basically
like this where the,
the texture is cached into the context
through the first thread and then
utilized and drawn by the second thread.
And let's do a,
let's do a quick demo of that.
So if we can go to demo machine two.
So this is also a demo that I did
last year and I felt it was important
enough to leave it in the material.
So what this does is, is a,
something similar to a screen saver.
In fact,
let's just kill the CPU monitor here.
Let's get it out of the way.
So what this is doing is if you
were to hear the hard disk in here,
we have one thread
spooling data off disk,
decompressing it,
pumping it into the OpenGL stream
while the other thread's drawing.
And what this allows us to do is to
keep both CPUs busy with the process
of getting data to the screen.
So what you'll see is this is
similar to screensaver on steroids,
basically, right?
You can pump up how quickly
you page through the images.
And again, this is paging this
data off disk real time.
Spooling through it, displaying it,
and you can see you can get nice
smooth animations even though
the disk is going nuts over here.
Okay, let's switch back to slides.
We're moving kind of quick
because I wanted to save
some time for the profiler.
Profiler is a great tool.
So the OpenGL profiler,
let's get to a good subject here.
This is a new tool that we're providing.
It has a lot of powerful features
you'll want to look into and several
things that it can try to help you with.
As the name implies,
it can help you profile,
but it also potentially can
help you debug your application.
And I'll show you some potential
means of utilizing it for that.
So one of the things it
does is it provides general
statistics of OpenGL calls.
It also provides a call trace.
So it captures a stream
of your OpenGL commands.
And you can view that for the
sequence of commands that OpenGL is
seeing coming from the application.
The other thing it does is
it has a driver stats window.
So you can monitor kernel level data
and see what the graphics card's doing.
There's lots of useful data.
There's about 25 parameters
you can monitor that are
kernel level driver data.
That is a direct view into the driver
level picture of what's going on.
And the other thing it'll do is it
will allow you to set breakpoints.
So for instance,
you can say that you can set a breakpoint
and you can at that breakpoint you can
view the call stack of the application.
You can also look at the OpenGL state.
So for instance,
if you're trying to debug something
or look at the state of OpenGL at
a particular moment in time,
you can set a breakpoint, stop there,
and examine the contents of the
OpenGL state machine at that point.
So the other functionality
it has is you can no op and
profile any particular function.
So for instance,
you can go to the OpenGL API and say
I don't want to call that anymore.
And you can just hit a no op command
and it'll just turn that off.
You can also turn off profilings if
you're not interested in a particular
application or a particular function.
Maybe it's causing some performance
issues when you're profiling it.
You can turn it off and it will free
up profiling that particular function.
You can also cause it
to force the buffer,
flush the buffer after drawing.
So for instance,
it has a flag where you can hook up
a flush command to any OpenGL drawing
command and it'll flush the back
buffer to the front and show you the
contents after you draw something.
So this will allow you to potentially
step through an application and watch one
item appear at a time in the background.
So you can step through it and
see the scene being built up.
So, let's get to another demo
and let's look at that.
So this is on the Jaguar seed.
I have a version that's about two
weeks newer than what's on the seed,
so I'm going to,
it's going to be slightly
different in a couple cases.
So let's pull up a simple application.
So what you do is you choose your
application and you hit launch.
And now we're going to turn
on a couple effects here.
Okay, so you've got something going on.
You've got some strange
chess board going.
And what you do is you have
this green button here.
So the green button is just a master
switch for turning profiling on and off.
So I'm going to click that and I'm
going to start my profiling process.
Now we've got a number of options here.
You can see we've got the function stats.
Like I mentioned, we can collect stats.
We can capture call trace.
That's what this button is.
And we can force flush.
So we can do these independently.
One thing to remember with the profiler,
it is performance invasive.
If you have a lot of function
calls going through the system,
it will induce a slight overhead
to those function calls.
If you're using an immediate
mode function path,
it can actually start
inducing quite a bit.
So you'll want to potentially turn things
on and off if you're seeing the profiler
affecting your application performance.
So let's look stats real quick.
So this is what it looks like.
It's fundamentally a list of all your
function calls going through the system.
It times them and it tries
to determine where you're
spending your time in OpenGL.
So for instance we can see here
that it says we're spending 98%
of our time in GL call list.
So let's shrink that
window up a little bit.
We're only working with a
1024 by 768 display here,
so we're a little bit cramped for room.
So let's pull up call trace
just to look at it real quickly.
So here it is.
It's just nothing more than the function
calls going through the system and
Unfortunately, it's not happy with that.
Okay,
so there you got a quick look at it.
We're going to start it again.
So this is still in
development obviously.
Okay, so let's get back to where we were.
Let's get the chessboard
doing what we want.
So let's move it off to the side.
Let's set these up.
Okay, so the other thing,
let me just check this other box here.
So it's force flush.
So there you see it's swap
buffering many times a frame.
It's just showing the contents
of the back buffer in real time.
Not really useful when you're not stopped
and looking at it in a break point.
Um, frame rate,
there's another button down here
that will tell you the frame rate.
So if you have an application
that doesn't list,
you don't have an explicit frame rate
counter built in the application,
you can just launch this and use it
to monitor the frame rate right here.
Okay,
so let's get into usefulness of this.
Um, so break points.
So here's a, a, the break point window.
And what this does,
this isn't the version I was
wanting to run actually,
I don't know where this came from.
So what this does is this allows
you to break at any given function.
It allows you to turn profiling on
and off and it allows you to turn
off execution of that function.
So we noticed from the call stats before,
let's pull those back up,
that we're spending
time in our call list.
So we'll shrink that back down.
So we're spending time in call list.
So let's see just briefly
here what we can do with that.
So if we tab up, if I can learn to spell,
if we tab up the call list right
there and we set a breakpoint,
so you can see we're stopped there.
Now,
one of the useful things you can do there
is you can set force flush and you can
basically step through your functions,
your call trees,
and every time you're at a breakpoint,
what you can do is you can stop and you
can open up the OpenGL state and you can
look through your state determining if at
that given point your state is correct.
So the thing that's missing on this
version that I wanted to show you and
the reason that I wanted to bring a newer
copy here is that there's a tab here
now and you can look at your call stack.
So you can look at the OpenGL call stack,
you can look at your state and in
conjunction with your call trace window,
you can look at how you got there, right?
So three pieces of information
available at any given
breakpoint are the call stack,
call trace and the OpenGL state.
So potentially,
if somebody is having problems with a
rendering technique you can backtrack
the system and find out why that's there.
Now, as the name implies,
this is actually most
useful for profiling,
at least we think it is.
One of the things that we like
to do when we are profiling an
application is we just let it run.
And the first thing we want to do is we
want to... Let's turn off force flush.
We want to no-op out all the
OpenGL commands and determine how
fast the application will run if
OpenGL is infinite in performance.
So what we would do is we
would say execute none.
So now you'll see that
there's nothing running,
nothing visually updating here.
But what we do is we go over here and
we look at the frame rate counter.
So,
we can see we were graphics card limited.
This application obviously
is not the bottleneck,
right?
So, you know,
I encourage everybody to do that
because it's good to just see how
fast your application will run without
OpenGL and get a feel for whether
you can actually blame us or not.
Okay, so let me turn execute back on.
Yeah, briefly, this is a powerful tool.
You all have it on your Jaguar seed.
Give it a try.
If you have any suggestions,
tell us about them.
I'm going to show you
one last thing here,
which is kind of the no op,
maybe potential use for the no op.
So if I turn off execution of threads,
I'm sorry, of call list,
I can see all my pieces went away.
So those are all being
drawn with call list.
I turn force flush back on,
and I want to break at GL begin.
So let's just set a
break point at GL begin.
And, okay, I'm stopped there.
So one potential use is you can
sit here and step-by-step go
through your application and
determine the contents of it.
So this is a very simplistic application,
obviously,
but it potentially can give you the
opportunity to see what the back
buffer of your application has,
what the state is, and debug some of your
rendering that you're doing.
I'm going to quit this application and
we're going to go back to the slides.
Okay, so we're going to wrap up.
So, briefly,
the optimization techniques that you
want to use are application dependent,
so there's a variety of techniques,
depending on your application and
what you're trying to perform.
Try to understand where
your bottlenecks are,
use the OpenGL Profiler,
use Sampler to find where
you're spending your time,
and apply the available
extensions to the problem.
We've got a number of extensions.
We've got 30 new extensions for
Jaguar that you can look at for
optimizing your application,
tuning it, getting it to run, grading it,
etc.
on macros 10.
Okay, so for more information,
I suggest everybody buys a copy
of the OpenGL programming guide
and the OpenGL reference manual.
These are great books.
I use them all the time.
They're always on my desk.
Okay, the roadmap.
So, we're a little bit late into the,
into WWDC,
so we're already through a few of these,
but for reference, once you get back and,
and want to potentially review some
of the material that was given here,
we're going to show this again.
Graphics and Imaging Overview is,
was a great session.
If you haven't seen a lot about
how to use the graphicsing,
general graphicsing power of OS X,
some of these sessions will
be good for you to review.
So, the second one as well,
Exploring Quartz
Compositor and Session 504,
Going into OpenGL Graphics Programming.
That one talked about our OpenGL shader,
uh, application,
which will help you program, uh,
shaders and, and write code for the
graphics card and hopefully,
uh, help you do that a
little more efficiently.
OpenGL Graphics, uh,
Integrated Graphics 1 went into some
of the system integration issues,
how to do certain things
within the operating system,
integrate your code better with the
operating system and work with it.
And hopefully, uh, to a better product.
Integrated Graphics 2, same thing,
went into some of the graphics, uh,
techniques that are generally applicable
for system integration issues.
Um, ColorSync, Digital Media, um,
and some game solutions
at the bottom there.
Advanced 3D was a session
right before this.
Hopefully that was useful for people that
saw it on how to put together some of the
advanced rendering techniques that people
use in NVIDIA and ATI for producing some
of these amazing demos that they do.
So 5.14 is the one we're in now.
And so what we have coming up tomorrow is
graphics and imaging performance tuning
and graphics and imaging feedback form.
So if you have any suggestions,
show up at the feedback form tomorrow.
We'll be there to listen to your
suggestions and hopefully improve
the product the next time around.
Well, in fact, even this time around
since you've got Jaguar.
So I'd like to get
Sergio Mello back up on stage.
He is a contact point for Apple.
If you have questions or
suggestions after the feedback form,
email them to Sergio.
He will do what he can to help.